# Oracle Grid Infrastructure and RAC Tidbits

This page contains miscellaneous but valuable pieces of information, quick tips, and observations concerning Oracle Grid Infrastructure and RAC. Each entry is designed to be a brief, standalone point.

## Oracle Grid Infrastructure

* We can have multiple Switches to manage multiple Private Interconnect networks to provide redundancy, which is called NIC bonding.
* Till Oracle 11.1, ASM was part of RAC software but from 11.2, ASM and Clusterware are part of Oracle Grid Infrastructure software.
* To store Oracle database files, we can use ASM and to use Non-Oracle database files, we can use OCFS (Oracle Cloud File System, previously known as ACFS) in shared file system.
* OCFS can also be used to store, data files, control files, online redo log files, etc.
* Another benefit of OCFS is that we can take snapshot of it and then snapshots of snapshots.
  * If we have a PDB database of say 10 TB, we can take a snapshot of this PDB, which will take seconds. This way we can clone our database very quickly, especially for our testing and QA databases.
  * OCFS has a feature of Tagging. So, we can set a group of directories or files as a logical group.
  * So, ACFS with DB Files, Tagging, Auditing, Encryption (TDE) and Snapshotting, is OCFS.
* We can install Oracle Clusterware in Standard Architecture or in Oracle Flex Architecture.
* If we want to consolidate Database Tier and Application Tier into one Oracle Cluster, then we can think of Flex Clusters.
  * Database runs on Hub Nodes and Applications run on Leaf Nodes.
  * Startup and Shutdown dependencies of Database and Application are also taken care by Flex Cluster, as dependencies can be defined here.
  * Leaf Nodes and Hub Nodes leverage HANFS, to ensure HA of storage.

## Oracle Clusterware Services

* `Voting Disk` is a Clusterware Repository, it keeps Node membership information.
  * `CSSD (Cluster Synchronisation Services Daemon)` background process continuously communicate with pier members and updates Voting Disk with status of pier members.
* `OCR (Oracle Cluster Registry)`, includes clusterware resource management information.
  * Example of resources is like DB Instance, Listener, VIPs, etc.
  * `CRSD (Cluster Ready Services Daemon)`, background process accesses OCR to manage Oracle Clusterware resources and updates OCR accordingly.
  * CRSD is responeible for starting, stopping, monitoring and failing over all configured cluster resources.
* Event Services publish events (messages) so that applications are aware of changes in the cluster. Events are generated by CRSD.
  * `EVMD (Event Manager Daemon)` background process is responsible for publishing these events.
  * Events are like resource state changes, node status changes, failures, etc.
* The `CTSSD (Cluster Time Synchronization Service Daemon)` background process is responsible for ensuring consistent time across all nodes in an Oracle RAC Cluster.
  * It can be either in `Observer Mode` or in `Active Mode`.
  * `Observer Mode`: If an NTP (Network Time Protocol) service is already configured and running in the Operating System, CTSSD will run in Observer Mode.
  * `Active Mode`: If NTP is not detected and configured on Operating System, CTSSD will start in Active Mode. In this mode, it actively synchronises time amount the cluster members, electing a reference node and pushing time updates to other nodes.
* The `ONS (Oracle Network Service)`, background process is responsible for Network Management. It provisions and manages VIP addresses that are associated with cluster nodes or application resources to provide a consistent network identity regardless of which nodes are available. In addition, `GNS (Grid Naming Service)` manages network naming within the cluster.
  * In order to keep and manager Oracle Cluster, we need two kind of Network Services.
    * One is to deal with Public Interfaces/Network and accept connections from Clients.
    * Second is network interface is to for Private Inter-communication between member nodes in the cluster.
